
[PAGE 1]
When Does an RL Update Teach?
 A Diagnostic and Controller Proposal Across GRPO,
                     PPO, and
     Single-Rollout Asynchronous Optimization


                                           Arvind C R
                                          PES University
                                      arvindcr4@gmail.com



                                             Abstract

         Reinforcement-learning post-training is usually budgeted in rollouts, tokens, or
         wall-clock time, even though some collected trajectories induce no policy gradient.
         This failure appears differently across algorithms: a flat reward group gives zero
         group-relative advantage in GRPO, a critic can produce a near-zero advantage in
         PPO, and policy lag can cause double-sided importance masking to discard an
         otherwise informative token in Single-Rollout Asynchronous Optimization (SAO).
         We give these cases one operational description. For every policy token, we separate
         potential advantage mass from the fraction that survives the algorithm’s trust-region
         gate, yielding Effective Gradient Mass (EGM) and a root-trajectory Zero-Update
         Fraction (ZUF). EGM equal to zero is a sufficient certificate of a zero score-function
         policy update; positive EGM is deliberately treated as a proxy, because token
         gradients can cancel. This decomposition supports T RIAGE RL, a cause-aware
         controller that retries failed-starved examples, retires or distills solved-saturated
         examples, trains the critic when credit is unreliable, and refreshes stale rollouts
         when clipping destroys useful signal. The controller preserves asynchronous single-
         rollout execution and logs sampling propensities to expose curriculum bias.
         We ground the proposal in an audited GRPO artifact. Across 505 unique prompt-
         seed tasks, the identity between contrastive group yield and the gap between
         pass@G and unanimous success holds to 1.11 × 10−16 . In a 2,560-observation
         controller trace, 1,723 of 1,867 escalation events (92.3%) occurred on all-correct
         groups, whereas only 144 occurred on all-wrong groups. These are descriptive
         and counterfactual results, not evidence that the new controller improves held-out
         accuracy. We therefore state a matched-budget, seed-paired evaluation contract for
         PPO and SAO rather than manufacturing missing outcomes. The paper’s contribu-
         tion is a unified diagnostic, falsifiable routing policy, and reproducible bridge from
         an established GRPO failure mode to critic-based PPO and asynchronous SAO.
         It reuses companion GRPO artifacts and must not be counted as an independent
         replication of those results.

         Venue claim boundary (workshop-short methods / proposal). Verified here:
         GRPO pass@G/ZVF identity, conditional group-size calculation, and all-correct/all-
         wrong controller counts from checked-in artifacts. Proposed here: Effective Gradi-
         ent Mass, TriageRL routing, and the PPO/SAO evaluation contract. Not claimed:
         any PPO, SAO, or GLM-style training outcome; causal held-out improvement from
         TriageRL; or global optimality of a group size. Closing the PPO/SAO measurement

Preprint. Under review.

[PAGE 2]
Signal Diagnostics                      Cause Classifier
    Rollout Trajectories
                                      PAM × GSR = EGM                     Solved / Failed / Critic Lag /
          (xb , yi )
                                        ZUF Calculation                       Transport / Invalid




                                           TRIAGE-RL Action Router
                                Retire (Solved) Retry (Failed) Critic-Only Repair
                                 Refresh Stale Rollouts Standard Policy Update

Figure 1: Signal Starvation Diagnostic and TRIAGE-RL Action Router Pipeline (N01). Decom-
posing credit into Potential Advantage Mass (PAM) and Gradient Survival Ratio (GSR), certifying
Effective Gradient Mass (EGM), and routing distinct failure causes.


          gate is future work and is not required for the diagnostic-plus-contract contribution
          targeted at a workshop-short venue.


1    Introduction
Long-horizon language-model reinforcement learning (RL) spends most of its budget before the
optimizer runs: agents interact with tools, environments return sparse outcomes, and trajectories
may contain hundreds of thousands of tokens. Yet a completed rollout is not necessarily an effective
update. A policy-gradient coefficient can vanish because no contrast exists, because a critic predicts
the observed outcome, or because an off-policy trust-region rule masks the token. Throughput metrics
do not distinguish these causes.
The distinction matters as systems move from synchronous group-relative optimization toward critic-
based single-rollout training. GRPO estimates a baseline from several responses to the same prompt
[11]; identical group rewards therefore erase the advantage. PPO uses a learned value baseline and a
sign-dependent clipped surrogate [10]. SAO replaces prompt groups with single rollouts and uses
a stricter double-sided token mask to stabilize asynchronous learning under policy lag [6]. The
official GLM-5.2 report describes a closely related production transition: compacted long trajectories
yield variable numbers of trainable sub-traces, so training moved from group-wise optimization to
critic-based PPO over individual rollouts [13]. The algorithms differ, but the operational question is
the same: how much generated learning signal reaches the actor?
We answer by factorizing the score-function coefficient into a generated signal and a survival gate.
This yields two cheap statistics that can be logged without an additional backward pass: potential
advantage mass (PAM) and gradient survival ratio (GSR). Their product is effective gradient mass
(EGM). A sampled gradient-norm audit guards against the known weakness of coefficient-only
proxies: nonzero weighted score vectors can cancel.
This framing changes the controller design. “Low signal” is not one state. All-correct GRPO groups
and all-wrong groups both have zero advantage, but the former are candidates for retirement or
distillation and the latter for targeted resampling. In PPO and SAO, low PAM with a calibrated critic
means the result was expected; low GSR with high PAM means signal existed but was destroyed by
clipping, for which a fresh rollout is preferable to widening the trust region. A bad critic calls for
critic-only updates, not repeated actor epochs. Invalid or hacked trajectories belong in a quarantine
path rather than the hard-example queue.
Our contributions are:
1. a unified, implementation-level decomposition of score-function signal in GRPO, PPO, and SAO,
   together with an exact zero-update certificate and an explicit non-converse;
2. T RIAGE RL, a root-trajectory controller that maps distinct starvation causes to retry, retire, critic-
   only, refresh, quarantine, or normal update;
3. two GRPO results reproduced from checked-in artifacts: an exact pass@G/ZVF identity and a
   strong asymmetry between all-correct and all-wrong controller fires; and
4. a preregistered evaluation contract that separates already observed GRPO facts from untested
   PPO/SAO hypotheses.
                                                  2

[PAGE 3]
Claim status. The mathematical identities and reported GRPO counts are verified. The unified
controller is a method proposal. Its PPO and SAO benefits are falsifiable hypotheses, not current
empirical claims. This is the eighteenth document in the program but not an eighteenth independent
evidence source.


2     Background and the Three Starvation Mechanisms

Let a behavior policy µ generate action token at in state st , and let πθ be the actor being optimized.
Define the token ratio
                               πθ (at | st )
                    ρt (θ) =                 = exp(log πθ (at | st ) − log µ(at | st )) .             (1)
                               µ(at | st )
The policy loss uses a detached advantage estimate At and, depending on the algorithm, a detached
token gate mt ∈ {0, 1}.

2.1   GRPO: signal is never generated for flat groups

For prompt x, GRPO samples G responses with rewards R1 , . . . , RG and forms a group-relative
advantage such as
                                          Ri − R̄x
                                  Agrp
                                    i   =          .                                       (2)
                                            sx + ε
If all rewards are equal, Agrp
                           i   = 0 for every response and every token. A later PPO-style clip may also
suppress signal, but the defining GRPO starvation event occurs before clipping: no within-prompt
contrast was generated. The zero-variance fraction (ZVF) is the fraction of sampled prompt groups
with this property.

2.2   PPO: credit can be absent or clipped away

PPO estimates At with a critic, commonly using generalized advantage estimation (GAE) [9], and
maximizes
                        ℓPPO
                         t    (θ) = min(ρt At , clip(ρt , 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)At ) .               (3)
Away from the clip boundary, its score-function term is weighted by
                                                    
                                                    0, At > 0 and ρt > 1 + ϵ,
               cPPO
                t    = m PPO
                         t     ρ  A
                                 t t ,    m PPO
                                            t     =   0, At < 0 and ρt < 1 − ϵ,                       (4)
                                                    
                                                      1, otherwise.

PPO can therefore starve because At ≈ 0 (credit starvation) or because the sign-dependent clipping
gate is zero (transport starvation). The common aggregate clip fraction merges these with healthy
tokens and does not say whether the clipped tokens carried substantial advantage.

2.3   SAO: strict survival under asynchronous policy lag

SAO is designed for asynchronous, single-rollout agentic RL. It uses a critic, updates that critic
more frequently than the actor, freezes attention parameters during value-model training, and skips
environment-observation tokens when constructing token-level GAE [6]. To stabilize off-policy
updates, direct double-sided importance sampling (DIS) retains only tokens inside an asymmetric
interval:
                  mSAO
                    t    = ind[1 − ϵl < ρt < 1 + ϵh ] ,      cSAO
                                                              t    = mSAO
                                                                        t  ρ t At .             (5)
Unlike PPO’s sign-dependent gate, DIS masks either sign outside the interval. This is a stability
mechanism, not a flaw. But when policy lag makes most high-advantage tokens fail the gate, a
throughput-efficient learner can still be update-inefficient. The right response is usually to reduce lag
or refresh the rollout, not to weaken the safety boundary.


                                                      3

[PAGE 4]
3     A Unified Signal-Survival Formalism

For any actor token, let
                              ct = mt ρt At ,      zt = ∇θ log πθ (at | st ).                        (6)
For a token batch B, the score-function component of the surrogate gradient is
                                                   1 X
                                           gB =        ct zt .                                       (7)
                                                  |B|
                                                        t∈B

Entropy, KL, and value-loss gradients are deliberately excluded: the question is whether the sampled
reward signal teaches the actor.

3.1   Potential, survival, and effective mass

We define
                                     1 X
                           PAM(B) =           (ρt At )2 ,                                            (8)
                                    |B|
                                         t∈B
                                    P                   2
                                          t mt (ρt At )                   2
                                                             P
                                     P
                                                      2
                                                           ,    t (ρt At ) > 0,
                           GSR(B) =         t (ρt At )                                               (9)
                                    
                                      0,                     otherwise,
                                     1  X
                           EGM(B) =           c2t = PAM(B)GSR(B).                                  (10)
                                    |B|
                                            t∈B



 Potential Advantage Mass                  Gradient Survival  Ratio                                 Effective Gradient Mass
                                                      P            2              ×
             1
                  (ρt At )2                GSR(B) = Pm(ρt (ρ t At )
               P
 PAM(B) = |B|                                                    2                                  EGM(B) = PAM · GSR
                                                           t At )




                                     Zero-Update Certificate Protocol
                           EGM(B) = 0 ⇐⇒ gB = 0 (Exact Zero Update Guarantee)

Figure 2: Token-Level Credit Factorization and Zero-Update Certificate (N01). Illustrating the
product decomposition EGM = PAM × GSR and the exact score-function zero-update certificate.

PAM measures generated credit before the gate. GSR measures how much squared credit survives it.
EGM is the surviving coefficient mass. Squaring makes positive and negative advantages comparable
and prevents cancellation from being hidden at this diagnostic stage.
For a set of root trajectories R, define the near-zero update rate
                                                 1 X
                                ZUFδ (R) =           1[EGM(τ ) ≤ δ] .                              (11)
                                                |R|
                                                   τ ∈R

At δ = 0, ZUF is an exact coefficient-level zero-update fraction. A positive δ, fixed from warm-up
data, measures practical near-starvation. This root-level ZUF is distinct from GRPO’s zero-variance
fraction (ZVF), though a flat GRPO group normally belongs to both sets.
Proposition 1 (Exact zero-update certificate). If EGM(B) = 0, then the reward-conditioned score-
function gradient gB in Eq. (7) is exactly zero. The converse does not hold in general.

Proof. EGM is a sum of nonnegative terms. If it is zero, every ct = 0, hence every summand in
Eq. (7) is zero. Conversely, nonzero vectors ct zt can cancel, or score vectors can be degenerate, while
EGM remains positive.


                                                    4

[PAGE 5]
Table 1: The same coefficient decomposition exposes different starvation causes. “Generated” refers
to PAM; “survives” refers to GSR.

Method       Advantage source                 Gate                                Exact zero-update route
GRPO         Within-prompt group reward       PPO-style gate, if used             Flat group makes Agrp = 0
PPO          Critic plus GAE                  Sign-dependent clipping             A = 0 or all nonzero terms
                                                                                  clipped
SAO          Critic plus skip-observation     Strict two-sided DIS mask           A = 0 or every useful token
             GAE                                                                  masked

Table 2: Cause-aware routing. Low/high are relative to preregistered warm-up thresholds, not values
tuned on final outcomes.
State                   Evidence              Interpretation       Actor action              Data action
Solved saturation       high R, high V̂ ,     expected success     none/minimal              retire or distill
                        low PAM
Failed starvation       low R, low V̂ , low   expected failure     none/minimal              bounded retry
                        PAM
Critic lag              high eV or uncer-     unreliable credit    defer                     critic-only updates
                        tainty
Transport starvation    high PAM, low         useful credit was    stop epochs               refresh from latest
                        GSR                   gated                                          policy
Healthy                 nontrivial EGM, ac-   update can teach     actor-critic              base stream
                        ceptable eV
Invalid/hacked          h(τ ) = 1             corrupted reward     no reward update          quarantine



This non-converse is important. EGM is an inexpensive routing statistic, not a theorem that an update
will improve reward. We therefore pair it with a periodic geometry-aware audit,
                                                                    2
                                                1 X
                                      GUN(B) =       ct zt              ,                                        (12)
                                               |B| t
                                                                    2

measured on sampled microbatches before optimizer preconditioning. EGM must predict this
gradient-update norm and, separately, marginal learning progress to earn operational trust.

3.2     One table, three algorithms

At initialization of a GRPO actor epoch, ρ ≈ 1 and the clip gate usually survives, so ZVF is the
dominant certificate. Later GRPO epochs can also suffer transport starvation and should log both
quantities. In PPO and SAO, the critic replaces the group baseline, but it does not eliminate zero
updates; it relocates them from group variance to credit and trust-region mechanisms.

3.3     Root trajectories, not compacted chunks

Long-horizon systems may compact one environment episode into chunks τ1 , . . . , τJ . Routing
each chunk independently overweights episodes that happen to compact more often. We retain a
root_trajectory_id and compute token-micro EGM over all action tokens in the root. We report
both root-macro ZUF (each episode counts once) and token-micro EGM (each trainable token counts
once). A retry, retirement, or quarantine decision is made once per root; loss normalization can
remain token-level, as in the GLM-5.2 description [13].


4     Boundary Semantics: Zero Is Not One State

Let R(τ ) be a root outcome, V̂ (τ ) the critic’s pre-outcome value, eV a held-out value error or
calibration statistic, and h(τ ) an invalid/hack flag. Table 2 maps observable states to distinct causes.
Thresholds are calibrated on a warm-up split and frozen before the comparison arms run.


                                                      5

[PAGE 6]
Algorithm 1 Root-trajectory signal triage
Require: root τ , ratios ρt , advantages At , gates mt , critic diagnostics eV , uV , outcome R, invalid
    flag h
 1: Aggregate PAM, GSR, and EGM over action tokens sharing root_trajectory_id
 2: if h = 1 then
 3:    quarantine τ ; train neither actor nor reward-conditioned critic
 4: else if eV > τV or uV > τU then
 5:    enqueue critic-only updates; defer actor use of τ
 6: else if PAM > τA and GSR < τS then
 7:    stop further actor epochs; request a fresh-policy rollout
                                     fail
 8: else if PAM ≤ τA and R ≤ τR           then
 9:    add a bounded, propensity-logged retry to the asynchronous queue
                                     solve
10: else if PAM ≤ τA and R ≥ τR            then
11:    retire from priority sampling or send to a distillation buffer
12: else
13:    apply the ordinary actor-critic update
14: end if
15: Preserve at least qmin probability for the base data stream


The invalid path is essential for coding agents. The GLM-5.2 report describes online anti-hack
filtering because pass/fail rewards can be inflated by reading protected artifacts or fetching target
code [13]. Treating those trajectories as hard negatives would train on a contaminated target.

5     TriageRL: A Cause-Aware Controller
T RIAGE RL operates beside, rather than inside, the base optimizer. It does not turn SAO into grouped
sampling: every completed root is handled immediately, and retries enter a nonblocking priority
queue as independent future rollouts.

5.1   Retry only where another rollout has value

Failure-only does not mean “sample the hardest prompt forever.” Maintain a Beta posterior px ∼
Beta(αx , βx ) for binary success and prioritize
                                            p
                         E[px (1 − px )] + β Var[px (1 − px )]
                  Ux =                                         1[failed starvation],       (13)
                                         cost(x)
                                         d
subject to a per-root retry cap. The posterior variance term explores uncertain prompts; p(1 − p)
de-prioritizes both hopeless and already solved items. This connects the controller to adaptive rollout
allocation methods such as CERO [14], but the semantic gate prevents symmetric escalation of
all-correct and all-wrong observations.

5.2   Adapt actor and critic work for different reasons

For PPO, recompute GSR after each actor epoch and stop when either target KL is exceeded or
marginal surviving mass drops below the frozen threshold. High PAM plus low GSR means additional
epochs cannot recover the masked evidence. For SAO, the analogous action is to reduce queue lag or
refresh a trajectory; widening DIS would trade the observed inefficiency for off-policy instability.
Critic work is controlled separately. Let KV be critic steps per actor step. Increase KV only when
held-out explained variance, calibration, or ensemble disagreement indicates critic lag, up to a fixed
Kmax . SAO’s reported choice of two critic updates per actor update is a strong default [6]; T RIAGE RL
makes the ratio conditional rather than universal.

5.3   Outcome-conditioned sampling changes the objective

A failure-only queue is a curriculum and can bias the training distribution. We mix it with the base
sampler so every base stratum has probability at least qmin . Each root logs its selection probability


                                                   6

[PAGE 7]
Table 3: Equal-mean polarization audit at G = 5. The second cohort is a constructed mean-preserving
polarized comparison, not a training run.

               Cohort                               mean p    Var(p)      ZVF     1−ZVF
               Observed middle (n = 505)            0.6743    0.0369    0.2680     0.7320
               Equal-mean polarized (n = 1000)      0.6743    0.1140    0.5876     0.4124



q(x) and reference probability p0 (x). When the target is the base distribution, the actor loss uses a
clipped propensity weight
                                                              
                                                        p0 (x)
                                   w(x) = min wmax ,             .                                (14)
                                                         q(x)
If q(x) is not identifiable (for example, an open-ended environment creates new tasks), the run is
labeled curriculum optimization rather than presented as an unbiased estimator. Untouched held-out
evaluation remains mandatory.


6     Existing GRPO Evidence

This section reports a deterministic re-analysis of checked-in experiment artifacts; it contains no
PPO or SAO run. The source contains 2,525 rows but 505 unique (seed, problem) keys because
probabilities repeat across group settings. No key has conflicting success probabilities.

6.1   Pass@G and contrastive yield are the same event accounting

Let each prompt have single-sample success probability px . For binary rewards and G conditionally
independent samples,
                                    ZVFG = Ex [pG            G
                                                x + (1 − px ) ].                                     (15)
Define pass@G = 1 − Ex [(1 − px )G ] and define passG = Ex [pG
                                                             x ] as the probability that all G
samples pass. Then
                                   pass@G − passG = 1 − ZVFG .                                       (16)
The left side is exactly the probability mass of groups containing both a success and a failure, which
is precisely the group-relative contrast GRPO can use. Across G = 2, . . . , 16 and 505 unique tasks,
the maximum numerical discrepancy was 1.11 × 10−16 .
Proposition 2 (Polarization increases flat groups). For G ≥ 2, fG (p) = pG + (1 − p)G is convex on
[0, 1]. Therefore, among prompt-probability distributions with equal mean, a mean-preserving spread
cannot decrease expected ZVF.

The proof is in Appendix A. This explains why improving easy prompts while making hard prompts
harder can raise average reward yet reduce contrastive training yield.
                                                       √
On the observed uncertain-middle cohort, (1 − ZVF)/ G is maximized at G = 4. The G = 4 minus
G = 5 difference is 0.00177 with a 95% bootstrap interval [0.00082, 0.00270]; G = 4 wins all 5,000
bootstrap resamples. This is a conditional allocation result for this cohort and utility, not a claim that
G = 4 is globally optimal.

6.2   The current escalation rule mostly spends on solved groups

The controller trace contains four methods, 40 steps, and 16 prompts per step (4 × 40 × 16 = 2,560
observations). It fired 1,867 times. Table 4 shows the boundary split.
An all-wrong-only counterfactual would remove 92.3% of these escalation events. The audit does
not establish that accuracy would be preserved: all-correct samples may still regularize the policy
or protect against forgetting. This uncertainty motivates a causal matched-budget comparison of
symmetric escalation, failure-only retry, and failure-only retry plus solved retirement/distillation.


                                                    7

[PAGE 8]
Table 4: Audited escalation events. “Recovered contrast” is descriptive under the logged escalation;
it is not held-out reward improvement.

                     Boundary      Fires   Share of fires   Mean recovered contrast
                     All correct   1,723          92.3%                      0.513
                     All wrong       144           7.7%                      0.634
                     Total         1,867            100%                         –



7     Preregistered Evaluation Contract for PPO and SAO
The following tests are specified before collecting controller outcomes. Pilot data may set thresholds
and estimate variance, but it is excluded from the confirmatory comparison and thresholds are frozen
afterward.

7.1   Hypotheses and falsification criteria

H1: diagnostic validity. Within algorithm and training phase, root EGM should predict the sampled
geometry-aware norm in Eq. (12) better than reward alone, raw advantage variance alone, or clip
fraction alone. H1 fails if paired out-of-sample R2 does not improve over the best baseline or if EGM
bins are not monotone in the probability of a nonzero gradient norm.

H2: cause-aware allocation. At matched rollout tokens and environment calls, failure-only retry
plus solved retirement/distillation should improve held-out success per million rollout tokens over
symmetric low-signal resampling. H2 fails if the paired 95% confidence interval includes zero on the
preregistered primary metric.

H3: refresh beats trust-region widening. For high-PAM/low-GSR roots, fresh-policy recollection
should outperform wider PPO/DIS clipping at matched generated tokens, measured by stability-
adjusted held-out success. H3 fails if refresh does not improve success or if it increases collapse/hack
rate enough to lose the composite endpoint.

H4: root routing avoids compaction bias. On compacted agent traces, root-level routing should
reduce the association between number of chunks and selection probability while preserving or im-
proving held-out reward. H4 fails if chunk-level routing performs at least as well without measurable
compaction bias.

7.2   Arms, controls, and budgets

For each algorithm-task cell, compare:

1. Base: the published or repository baseline;
2. Symmetric: retry any low-EGM root, matching the original GRPO escalation semantics;
3. Failure-only: retry only failed-starved roots;
4. Boundary-aware: failure-only retry plus solved retirement or distillation; and
5. Full triage: boundary-aware routing plus critic-only and fresh-policy transport-starvation actions.

The GRPO/PPO isolation cell uses the same Qwen3-8B initialization, GSM8K split, LoRA rank 4,
tokenizer, reward, maximum length, and five seeds. The agentic cell uses an open Qwen3-30B-A3B
checkpoint with a fixed scaffold and a public SWE-Bench Verified split, matching SAO’s published
scale where feasible [6]. If resource constraints require a smaller model, that change is made for all
arms and recorded before confirmatory runs.
Primary budgets are generated action tokens and environment calls. Actor forward/backward FLOPs
and wall-clock time are secondary budget views. Each arm receives identical maximums and an
identical base-stream floor. Every root logs model version, lag, behavior log-probability, token ratio,
advantage, gate, reward, value prediction, chunk count, selection propensity, invalid flag, and route.


                                                    8

[PAGE 9]
7.3   Endpoints and analysis

The primary endpoint is held-out success per million generated action tokens. Secondary endpoints
are held-out pass@1 and pass@k, root-macro ZUF, token-micro PAM/GSR/EGM, sampled GUN,
critic explained variance and calibration error, actor KL, stale-token fraction, effective updates per
wall-clock hour, reward hack rate, and collapse incidence. Results use seed-paired differences, prompt-
clustered bootstrap intervals, and both intention-to-route and as-routed analyses. Hyperparameters
and exclusion rules are frozen in a machine-readable manifest before the confirmatory run.

8     Related Work
PPO introduced the clipped policy surrogate used widely in RLHF [8, 10]; GAE provides its standard
bias-variance tradeoff for critic advantages [9]. GRPO removes the learned critic by normalizing
rewards within prompt groups [11], a design later popularized in reasoning systems [3]. REINFORCE-
style baselines such as RLOO offer another critic-free route [1].
Recent work attacks rollout cost from complementary directions. CERO treats cross-epoch rollout
allocation as an online resource-allocation problem [14]. BASIS shares information across a batch
while using one rollout per prompt [5]. A Monte Carlo pass@k critic supplies token-level credit for
single-rollout PPO [2]. These methods improve the source or allocation of advantage information.
Our focus is the downstream accounting question: after baseline estimation and trust-region gating,
which root trajectories still reach the actor, and what should the system do with each failure cause?
SAO directly targets single-rollout asynchronous agentic RL and introduces strict double-sided mask-
ing, faster critic updates, frozen-attention critic training, and skip-observation GAE [6]. Asynchronous
actor- learner systems have long required off-policy correction [4, 7]; recent scaling-law work studies
the interaction between staleness and learning rate in asynchronous RLHF [12]. T RIAGE RL is
complementary: it treats staleness as one observable cause of signal non-survival and routes it without
relaxing the base optimizer’s stability rule.

9     Limitations and Broader Impact
Submission       non-claims. This      workshop-short     manuscript does      not    report
PPO or SAO training results.                   Instrumentation and preregistration under
platform_hybrid/experiments/signal_starvation/ are shipped so those runs can be
executed later; their absence does not weaken the GRPO-grounded diagnostic or the evaluation
contract stated above.
First, EGM is not an improvement guarantee. It ignores score-vector geometry, optimizer precondi-
tioning, gradient interference across roots, and the possibility that a large gradient is harmful. Periodic
GUN measurement and held-out reward are therefore necessary. Second, critic errors can make the
semantic split wrong: a low advantage may reflect miscalibration rather than true saturation. The
critic-lag route and calibration diagnostics reduce but do not eliminate this risk.
Third, the binary solved/failed framing is cleanest for verifiable rewards. Dense or multi-objective
environments require vector-valued boundary rules and careful reward-scale normalization. Fourth,
retry curricula change data exposure. Propensity weighting can have high variance and may be
impossible in an open task generator; such runs must be labeled as curriculum learning. Fifth, the
current empirical section is GRPO-only and mostly arithmetic. The PPO/SAO generalization remains
unverified until the evaluation contract is executed. Finally, adaptive hard-example sampling can
amplify unsafe or adversarial behaviors. Invalid/hack quarantine, a base-stream floor, capped retries,
and fixed held-out safety evaluation are required guardrails.

10     Conclusion
GRPO flat groups, PPO clipping, and SAO double-sided masking look like separate pathologies
because they occur at different stages. At the actor interface, they share a simple structure: an
advantage must be generated and then survive the trust-region gate. PAM, GSR, EGM, and root ZUF
make that structure observable. The resulting controller is intentionally asymmetric: retry failed


                                                    9

[PAGE 10]
starvation, retire solved saturation, repair the critic when credit is unreliable, refresh the policy when
useful evidence is stale, and quarantine corrupted rewards. Existing GRPO artifacts establish the
accounting identity and motivate the asymmetry; matched-budget PPO and SAO experiments must
decide whether it improves learning. That separation between verified evidence and testable proposal
is the central methodological commitment of this work.

References
 [1] Arash Ahmadian, Chris Cremer, Matthias Gallé, Marzieh Fadaee, Julia Kreutzer, Olivier
     Pietquin, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. Back to basics: Revisiting reinforce style optimization
     for learning from human feedback in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14740, 2024.
 [2] Fengdi Che, Yang Liu, Lei Yu, Meng Cao, Tong Che, A. Rupam Mahmood, and Dale
     Schuurmans. Learning with a single rollout via monte carlo pass@k critic. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2606.25451, 2026.
 [3] DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement
     learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
 [4] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Rémi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward,
     Yotam Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl
     with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International Conference on Machine
     Learning, 2018.
 [5] Shijin Gong, Erhan Xu, Kai Ye, Francesco Quinzan, Giulia Livieri, and Chengchun Shi. Basis:
     Batchwise advantage estimation from single-rollout information sharing for llm reasoning.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.27293, 2026.
 [6] Zhenyu Hou, Yujiang Li, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. Single-rollout asynchronous optimization
     for agentic reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.07508, 2026.
 [7] Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lilli-
     crap, Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep
     reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016.
 [8] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
     Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models
     to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 2022.
 [9] John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
     dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. International Confer-
     ence on Learning Representations, 2016.
[10] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal
     policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[11] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
     Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of
     mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
[12] Jingwei Song, Haofeng Xu, Jie Xiao, Chengke Bao, Jingwei Shi, Pengbin Feng, Weixun Wang,
     Yuhang Han, Chuan Wu, Linfeng Zhang, and Bill Shi. Staleness-learning rate scaling laws for
     asynchronous rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.01083, 2026.
[13] Z.ai. Glm-5.2: Built for long-horizon tasks. https://z.ai/blog/glm-5.2, 2026. Accessed
     2026-07-14.
[14] Yiming Zong, Yige Wang, and Jiashuo Jiang. Cross-epoch adaptive rollout optimization for rl
     post-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.05606, 2026.


A     Proofs and Derivations
A.1   PPO’s sign-dependent gate

For At > 0, Eq. (3) equals the constant (1 + ϵ)At whenever ρt > 1 + ϵ, so its policy gradient is
zero. Below that boundary it equals ρt At . For At < 0, the minimum reverses which branch is


                                                   10

[PAGE 11]
active: the loss is constant below 1 − ϵ and remains ρt At otherwise. This yields Eq. (4), ignoring the
measure-zero nondifferentiable boundary.

A.2   Pass@G/ZVF identity

Conditioned on px , an all-success group occurs with probability pG x , an all-failure group with
probability (1 − px )G , and a contrastive group with the remaining probability. Averaging over
prompts gives

                        pass@G − passG = 1 − Ex [(1 − px )G ] − Ex [pG
                                                               
                                                                        x]
                                           = 1 − Ex [pG            G
                                                      x + (1 − px ) ]
                                           = 1 − ZVFG .

A.3   Polarization proposition

For G ≥ 2,
                           ′′
                              (p) = G(G − 1) pG−2 + (1 − p)G−2 ≥ 0.
                                                              
                          fG
Thus fG is convex. If P ′ is a mean-preserving spread of P , then P ′ dominates P in convex order, so
E[fG (P ′ )] ≥ E[fG (P )]. By Eq. (15), expected ZVF cannot decrease.

B     Implementation Contract

B.1   Minimum log schema

Each action token should record root_trajectory_id, chunk_id, token_index,
behavior_model_version, learner_model_version, logp_behavior, logp_current,
advantage, gate, and is_action_token. Each root should record reward components, value
prediction, critic uncertainty, invalid/hack reason, sampling propensity, route, retry count, generated
tokens, environment calls, and wall-clock latency. Observations are excluded from actor EGM in
skip-observation agentic training.

B.2   Numerical checks

The implementation should assert:

1. 0 ≤ GSR ≤ 1 and EGM = PAM GSR to numerical tolerance;
2. PPO gates match Eq. (4) for all four sign/boundary combinations;
3. SAO gates are zero on both sides of the DIS interval;
4. flat GRPO groups have PAM and EGM equal to zero;
5. root aggregation is invariant to a lossless repartition into chunks;
6. actor epochs stop on the same batch when GSR falls below threshold;
7. base-stream probability never falls below qmin ; and
8. invalid roots never enter retry or actor-update queues.

B.3   Reference integration points

The repository’s compact PPO implementation computes ratios, clipped surrogate losses, approxi-
mate KL, clip fractions, and the new detached PAM/GSR/EGM diagnostics in platform_hybrid/
experiments/implementations/cleanrl_ppo_math.py. The framework-independent formu-
las, trace analyzer, boundary tests, and frozen machine-readable contract live in platform_hybrid/
experiments/signal_starvation/. This is executable instrumentation on a small arithmetic
PPO implementation, not evidence for language-model PPO, SAO, or GLM-5.2. Production conclu-
sions require the matched-budget experiments in Section 7.


                                                  11

[PAGE 12]
C    Reproducibility and Evidence Ledger
The deterministic audit is reproduced from the repository root with:

python3 analysis/breakthroughs_2026-07-13/analyze_breakthroughs.py

It reads:

• platform_hybrid/experiments/results/zvf_iter46_per_prompt_isog.tsv;
• platform_hybrid/experiments/results/p5p8/p7_iter203_emp_per_obs.tsv;
• platform_hybrid/experiments/results/berkeley/passk_reliability_curve.tsv.

The generated summary is analysis/breakthroughs_2026-07-13/summary.json. The audit
explicitly marks causal held-out improvement, global G = 4 optimality, and performance preservation
under all-wrong-only routing as not established.

D    Decision Rules for Negative Results
The proposed controller should be rejected or revised under any of the following outcomes:

• EGM fails to predict sampled gradient norm beyond clip fraction and advantage variance;
• failure-only routing improves training reward but reduces untouched held-out success, indicating
  curriculum overfit;
• solved retirement causes measurable forgetting that distillation or a base-stream floor cannot repair;
• critic-only routing increases value explained variance without improving actor endpoints, indicating
  a misaligned critic target;
• refresh consumes more tokens than it recovers in surviving signal; or
• root-level routing does not reduce chunk-count selection bias.

Publishing these failures would still test the paper’s central premise: a diagnostic should earn control
authority through prospective evidence rather than through an appealing retrospective decomposition.




                                                  12